Algorithmic Trading - A Practitioners Guide

Risk Management & Portfolio Theory

Nick Firoozye / Brian Healy
18th December 2023
Outline

     1. Asset Pricing Models
     2. Optimal Portfolios
     3. Risk Management
     4. Market Risk
     5. Operational Risk
     6. Optimal Scaling for Strategies
     7. Value at Risk and Related Appraches
     8. Factor Models

                                                                                                                                                    1
Asset Pricing Models
Asset Pricing Model

                An asset pricing model is a quantitative model that
             describes the value of a portfolio (including single-stock

                      ones) based on a set of financial indicators.

                                                                                                                                                    2
CAPM, Fama-French, APT

     Here we will briefly discuss three main asset pricing models: Capital
     Asset Pricing model (CAPM), Fama-French three factor model and the
     more general Arbitrage Pricing Theory (APT).

                                                                                                                                                    3
CAPM

     Capital Asset Pricing model (CAPM)
         À This describes the values of portfolio returns by comparing
           against market returns, introducing , that is a measure of the
           volatility of a portfolio (stock) return as compared with market
           return volatility and introducing also s, that is a measure of the
           residual expected return of a portfolio (stock) return, we get the
           more general formulation,

                                 rit - rft = i + iM (rMt - rft) + it

                                                                                                                                                    4
CAPM Illustration 1

                                              Figure 1: Caption

                                                                                                                                                    5
Asset Pricing Models

     Definition: Asset Pricing Model
     An asset pricing model is a quantitative model that describes the
     value of a portfolio (including single-stock ones) based on a set of
     financial indicators.

                                                                                                                                                    6
CAPM, APT & Fama-French

     CAPM, APT, Fama-French
     Here we will briefly discuss three main asset pricing models:

         À Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM - Sharpe, Treynor, Lintner,
           Mossin, etc),

         À Arbitrage Pricing Theory (APT - Ross) A much more flexible
           framework

         À Fama-French a three/five/etc factor model. APT's most famous
           application

         À Each is the outcome of an equilibrium model where
           representative investors maximize the utility of their
           wealth/returns (i.e., MVO).

         À We will discuss in more detail when we discuss Portfolio
           Optimization.

                                                                                                                                                    7
CAPM

     CAPM
     Capital Asset Pricing model (CAPM) describes the values of asset
     returns by comparing against market returns,

         À In its most general formulation where ri is the return of the ith
           stock, rf is the risk-free return and rM is the market return
                                 rit - rft = i + iM (rMt - rft) + it

         À Here  is a measure of the sensitivity of the stock to the market,
           with higher values expecting higher compensation for the risk

         À In this most general formulation  is not in the original
           formulation, and is a measure of the residual expected return of
           a portfolio (stock) return

                                                                                                                                                    8
CAPM in Pictures

Figure 2: The efficient frontier with no risk-free, the tangency portfolio T,

which is the market, and the capital markets line                              9
APT

APT

     À Ross extended CAPM to consider multiple (non-diversifable)

     sources                 
                                 bijfjt
              reit  =  i  +              +  it

                             j

     À Here rei is the excess return of the ith asset, and fjt is the jth
       factor's excess return.

     À Note, unlike PCA, the factors need not be orthogonal.

     À All non-diversifiable sources of risk must have a market price of
       risk (i.e., a positive expected excess return), i.e,
                                    EP[ fj ] = j > 0, but
                                    EQ[ fj ] = 0

                                                                           10
APT

APT

     À Ross extended CAPM to consider multiple (non-diversifable)

     sources                        
                                        bijfjt
                     reit  =  i  +              +  it

                                    j

     À Here rie is the excess return of the ith asset, and fjt is the jth
       factor's excess return.

     À Note, unlike PCA, the factors need not be orthogonal.

     À All non-diversifiable sources of risk must have a market price of
       risk (i.e., a positive expected excess return), i.e,
                                    EP[ fj ] = j > 0, but
                                    EQ[ fj ] = 0

     À All idiosyncratic risks are (asymptotically) diversifiable and thus,

     uncompensated.                                                          10
Fama-French Model
Fama-French three factor model describes the values of portfolio
returns by considering the returns of

   À an average market portfolio,
   À a stock size factor (Small Minus Big factor, SMB), and
   À stock book-to-market ratio factor (High Minus Low factor, HML).
   À Mathematically, we have

              rit - rft = i + iM (rMt - rft) + isSMBt + ihHMLt + it
   À SMB and HML are in the original formulation, but many others

      are feasible

                                                                                                                                           11
Fama-French Portfolios

Figure 3: FF Portfolio Excess Returns  12
Fama-French Model Explanation

     Fama-French
     The model introduces multiple s,

         À the small-vs-big (SMB) factor, which weights a stock market
           capitalization,

         À the high-vs-low factor (HML), which weights the ratio between
           the fundamental valuation and the market valuation of a stock.

         À the market beta () which weights the overall sensitivity to
           market moves

         À Stocks characterised by high book-to-market ratios are called
           value stocks, while stocks characterised by low ratios
           correspond to growth stocks.

                                                                                                                                                   13
Optimal Portfolios
Portfolio Theory

     Portfolio theory it it the theory which describes the criteria and the
     process of allocating capital in a portfolio,

                                              Figure 4: Caption

                                                                                                                                                   14
Optimal portfolio theory

Let us consider a universe of N assets, characterised by a N time

series of returns ri, let us compute two main quantities: the vector of
expected returns for each asset,

                                         Ái = ri
the covariance matrix for each pair of assets,

Sij  =                    (ri  -  Ái)  (rj  -    )
                                               Áj

                                                                         15
Optimal portfolio theory

     Predicting Ái and Sij is crucial for the efficient construction of an
     optimal portfolio. This requires modeling assumptions and statistical
     estimation methodologies from time series data. The challenge is
     two-fold:

         À estimating the correlation matrix between a large number of
           time series, e.g. stock returns, requires estimating N(N - 1)/2
           coefficients from N Î T data points,

         À predicting future values of expected correlations and expected
           returns, (i.e., the alphas), which is in many cases far harder.

     Correlation cleaning methodologies (linear and non-linear shrinkage,
     rotationally invariant estimators) and multivariate time-series
     prediction models are therefore crucial for portfolio optimisation.

                                                                                                                                                   16
Optimal portfolio theory

Let us ask this question: what would be a good portfolio selection

based on the quantities, Ái and Sij ? A portfolio, defined by a set of
weights wi , which would yield an high return while keeping a low
variance. The expected return for a generic portfolio reads

                                     

       Áp =                     wiri = wiÁi

                            i               i

the variance of a generic portfolio reads:

p2     (                  wiri        )2           wiSijwj
                                   Áp

    =                           -           =

       i                                       ij

                                                                        17
Optimal portfolio theory

Optimal portfolio theory
Let us find a methodology for the optimal portfolio selection: we

want to minimise p2 while we condition on the normalisation of the
portfolio, and on the expected return, i.e.

conditional on  w = argminwp2[w]
and
                     
                          wi = 1

                          i

                  
                       wiÁi = Áp.

                      i

                                                                    18
Generalisations

     We may also add further conditions on the weights:
         À No of short-selling wi > 0
         À Avoid concentration with a limit over the maximum weight,
           maxi wi < M
         À Limit leverage maxi |wi| < L
         À Limit investments in specific sectors, e.g. do not invest more
           than $10 in high-carbon assets

                                                                                                                                                   19
Two assets portfolio

     A simple case is the one with two assets, as we have only one
     relevant weight w, as the other one is naturally 1 - w , if we also
     make the hypothesis Á1 = Á2, then changing w the expected return,
     Áp, does not change.

                                                                                                                                                  20
Two assets portfolio

     The variance reads:
                           p2 = w212 + (1 - w)222 + 2w(1 - w)

     where  is the covariance between the two assets. Let us take the
     derivative of the variance with respect to w and set it to zero,

                        2w12 - 2(1 - w)22 + 2(1 - w) - 2w = 0.

                                                                                                                                                   21
Two assets portfolio

The solution reads

                      w  =    22 - 
                            12 + 22-2

                                       22
N assets portfolio

Let us consider a more general case with N assets, we want to

im.ei.nimiiwsei  =p21[wa]n, dcoonnditthioeneinxpgeocntetdherentuorrnm, ai.leis. atioi wni  of  the portfolio,
                                                                                           Ái  = Áp. We use

Lagrangian multipliers to perform the calculation: we want to

minimise

                    p2 [w]           wi           wiÁi
                      2
                            -  1         -  2

                                  i            i

                                                                                                               23
N assets portfolio

Taking the derivative with respect to wi and setting it to zero, we
obtain

                        (Sw)i = 1 + 2Ái

so the solution reads,

                                 w = S-1(11 + 2Á),
where 1 is a vector of ones.

                                                                     24
N assets portfolio

     We just need to fix the Lagrange multipliers, imposing the
     normalisation we obtain,

                                   1 = 11TS-11 + 21TS-1Á,
     and the portfolio expected return,

                                 Áp = 1ÁTS-11 + 2ÁTS-1Á.

                                                                                                                                                   25
N assets portfolio

We realise that we are looking at a linear system of two equations in
two variables,

                                     1 = 1a + 2b,
and

                       Áp = 1b + 2c,

whose solution reads,

                                   1 = (c - bÁp)/d
and

                                 2 = (-b + aÁp)/d

where d = ac - b2. We note that Lagrange multipliers are both linear
in the portfolio expected return Áp.

                                                                       26
N assets portfolio

     From this solution we can compute explicitly the variance of the
     optimal portfolio:

                                    p2 = 21 a + 212b + 22c
     Considering that the linear dependence of the Lagrange multipliers
     on the portfolio expected return Áp, the minimum variance
     p2 is quadratic in Áp, i.e.

                                       p2 = AÁp2 + BÁp + C
     Varying Áp and computing the corresponding p, it is possible to
     draw the efficient frontier.

                                                                                                                                                   27
Optimal Sharpe ratio

À By including a risk-free asset we can identify the tangency

portfolio.

À This is a portfolio in the return-risk plane that:

À Sits on the efficient frontier.      Áp -rf
                                         p
À  Has the highest Sharpe ratio, SR =          on the frontier.

À This means it sits on the line starting from the risk-free investment

   and touching the efficient frontier with the highest possible slope.

                                                                         28
Equivalent Formulations of MVO

À Portfolio Optimization is actually a set of optimisation problems
  - or a stochastic control problem.

À We can think of the following problems as being pretty much the

sameM: ax Return  max Á À                s  À 1 = 1

Min Risk          min                  ÁÀ=m À1=1

Max Utility       max  Á  À    -       À1=1
                                  2

À The max utility formulation allows us to consider various other
  formulations.

À As we let the risk-aversion  vary, we can trace out the entire
  efficient frontier.

                                                                     29
Adding Transaction Costs

À Transaction costs are the amount you pay to enter (and exit) a
  trade.

À Usually we model the mid price - the average of the best-bid
  and best-offer.

À Ignoring the size of the trades and the possibility of walking the
  order book etc.

À Let                             bid  +  ask
                                       2
                          mid  =

À Then assume that we buy at the ask price and sell at the bid
  price giving a transaction cost for each trade of:

                          tc  =  ask  -  bid
                                      2

                                                                      30
Adding Transaction Costs

À If tc is a vector of costs for all our assets and we assume that
  our current position is 0, we can reformulate the problem as:

max  Á                    À    -       -  tc  À  |  -  0|
                                  2
  

À There are many other functions of the recommended trade

( - 0) possible to model market impact or for computational
ease.

                                                                    31
Transaction Costs as QP

À Recall that a QP usually takes the form:
                                   max xPX + q À x

                                              Axb,Cx=d

À We can write our absolute value in this form using slack

variables, i.e,                 = 0 + b - s

with b  0, s  0             À  Á  -       -  tc  À  (b  +  s)
                     max             2

                                = 0 + b - s

                          b, s  0

À If tci > 0 then bisi = 0, i.e., you won't buy and sell the same
  asset.

                                                                   32
Transaction Costs - Closed Form Solutions

À We follow the approach in: De Miguel, Mei and Nogales,
  Multiperiod Portfolio Optimization with Many Risky Assets and
  General Transaction Costs.

À The N asset case is difficult to follow, so we look at the
  one-asset case:

        max           Á  -     22  -  tc |  -  0|
                            2
          

with  = cost aversion and  = risk-aversion.

À Let y =  - 0 then:

u(y) =                   Á(0   +  y)  -        +  y)22  -  tc|y|
                                         2 (0

=       Á0 + (Á - 20)y - (1/2)2y2 - tc|y|

and let Á~ = (Á - 20).

                                                                  33
Transaction Costs - Closed Form Solutions

À Taking FOC,

               u(y) = Á~ - 2y -  tc sign(y) = 0

À  So if y > 0, then y =  Á~-tc  and if y < 0 then y =  Á~+tc  and so
                           2                             2

                          Á~-tc  if Á~  tc
                           2     if - tc  Á~  tc
                                 if Á~  -tc
               y = 0Á~+tc
                          2

                                                                       34
Transaction Costs - Closed Form Solutions

À Rewriting in terms of , we see

  Á- tc          if                     Á- tc
    2                                     2
                                  0  <

 = Á0+ tc        if               0     [  Á- tc  ,  Á+ tc  ]
                                             2         2
              2
                 if               0  >  Á+ tc
                                          2

                                                               35
Transaction Costs - Explanation

À  There is a no-trade zone centered at the Markowitz solution   Á
                                                                2
   with  width  dependent  on  transaction  costs  (▒   tc  ).
                                                       2

À if initial allocation is in this zone, we do keep the position the

   same.

À if the initial allocation is below this zone, we trade to just the
  lower boundary of this zone.

À if the initial allocation is above this zone, we trade to just the
  upper boundary of this zone.

À higher tc increases width of no-trade zone, higher vol decreases
  width.

                                                                      36
Quadratic Programs

Quadratic Programs
More generally in the context of convex optimisation we want to
solve the following problems:

                    min  1  xTPx  +  qTx
                         2
                      x

subject to:              Gx  h
and

                         x=b

                                                                 37
QP and Slack Variables

À We can include net limits |  i|  C1 and gross limits  |i|  C2
  with ease.

À All QP problems include slack variables. For instance

i = i0  + bi   - smi wi ithCb2 it,osiimp0leamndenti   mi,    -i  -mi    with
mi  0   and                                          tcosts  and gross  limits.

À Easily a 30-asset problem can include 30 buys, 30 sells, 30

maxes, etc, increasing the size from a 30Î30 matrix input with a

30-vector of means to a 120Î120 or larger.

À Implementing and manipulating these large matrices is a huge
  problem-tedious

                                                                                 38
Examples

         À We will share a JuPyter Notebook giving CVXPY examples.
           (Stephen Boyd et al).

         À If you're interested in convex cone optimization, then
           Boyd-Vanderleven is a great resource.

         À Fortunately, CVXPY creates all the necessary matrices from our
           symbolic representations.

         À Not suitable for general optimization - must have special
           structure.

                                                                                                                                                   39
Tactical Asset Allocation

     Asset allocation with fixed weights is biased - True efficient frontier vs

       plug-ins, vs Covar-shrinkage, vs bootstrap method (Michaud et al), vs biased-Empirical
       Bayes method.

         Figure 5: MV Portfolio Optim when Means and Covar are Unknown Lai-Xing-Chen

                                                                                                                                                  40
Tactical Asset Allocation

À In practice, most asset managers will estimate:

      À Et[Rt] = Át
      À Cov[Rt] = t
      À tc

À using dynamic models, and then optimise the one-period ahead
  (or multiple period) optimisation model.

U()  =  Át                 À  t  -     t  tt  -    tct  À  |t|
                                    2

which is known as Tactical Asset Allocation (see, e.g., Grinnold-Kahn,
Active Portfolio Management - a very oddly notated book).

                                                                        41
Tactical Asset Allocation

         À Some people call this book the bible of automated trading. I
           very much disagree. Nonetheless, Grinnold and Kahn (Barra 
           Barclays Global Investors  Blackrock) are well known in this
           areas for active management (vs benchmarks, i.e., fund manager
           wants to outperform FTSE 100 and can be long only, can
           overweight and underweight sectors up to fixed limits, etc).

                                                                                                                                                   42
MVO as Regression

                              1 = X + e

                   e^ = (XX)-1X1

Note that

           (XX)-1X1 = ( + ÁÁ)-1Á

                              =  (-1   -  -1ÁÁ-1
                                          1 + Á-1Á )Á

                              =  1  +   1    -1  Á
                                       Á-1Á

A scaled tangency portfolio.

M Britten-Jones, Sampling Error in Estimatesof Mean Var Weights

                                                                 43
Risk Management
Risk Management

                    Risk management is the systematic process of
                   identifying, assessing, and mitigating threats or
                  uncertainties that can affect your organization. It
                   involves analyzing risks' likelihood and impact,
             developing strategies to minimize harm, and monitoring
                measures' effectiveness. - Harvard Business School

                                                                                                                                                  44
Risk Management

         À Different types of risk require different instruments of measure.
         À Harvey, Liu, and Zhu (2016) define a risk factor as a "variable that

           has unpredictable variation through time" and such that "assets'
           risk exposures to this factor need to be able to explain the
           cross-sectional return patterns."
         À Not every kind of risk is easily quantifiable, but the extensive
           literature attempting to explain asset returns' variations
           provides numerous examples of risk factors.
         À Cochrane (2011) speaks of a "zoo of factors" and Harvey et al.
           survey and provide a list of 316 factors from the general finance
           and economics literature.
         À Each of these factors is a potential candidate to explain in part
           the risks to which a portfolio is exposed.

                                                                                                                                                   45
Risk Management

         À Broadly, the types of risk to which portfolio is exposed fall into:
                 À Market risk, which is the single risk in the capital asset pricing
                   model (CAPM), represents the return of a broad market index.
                 À Liquidity risk is the risk of being unable to convert assets into cash
                   without incurring a loss of capital or income in the process. This
                   risk has been at the heart of many financial crises. Measuring
                   liquidity risk is difficult because it is a multidimensional concept
                   whose impact on returns may vary through time.
                 À Credit risk is the risk of default on a debt that may arise from a
                   borrower failing to make the required payments. At the market
                   level, a credit spread serves as one measurement of credit risk.

                         One of the best ways to make money is
                                          not to lose it.

                                                                                                                                                  46
Risk Management

         À One type of risk is always present - operational risk.
         À More fund failures are due to operational mismanagement than

           any other failing.
         À This is the risk associated with:

                 À Personnel problems.
                 À Issues with the investment process.
                 À Internal control failures.
                 À Compliance issues.
         À Operational risk is difficult to assess because it depends on
           many intangible variables but measurable issues exist.

                                                                                                                                                   47
Risk Management

À Risk measurement and risk management are closely related

activities and both are important contributors to the success or

failure of a fund:

À Complex strategies require advanced risk measures and

management tools adapted to the characteristics of the fund and

its investment approach.

À The regulatory oversight of much of the fund space is looser than

for much of the rest of the industry and the opaque nature of

many fund makes it difficult for investors to measure performance

and risk.

À A lack of transparency and oversight means that operational risks

are potentially a big issue.

À Properly managed risk can have a significant effect on

performance but this relies on the correct assessment of risk.

À Given the inexorable trade-off between risk and return, we can

only accurately judge performance/return with accurate

knowledge of the risks and this can only be achieved through

rigorous risk measurement/management.                                48
Market Risk
Delta

       À This is the sensitivity of a position or portfolio P to a single
         underlying.

       À It is expressed as:

                              Delta  =  P
                                        S
       where S can represent any underlying variable but is typically

       something like:

       À Spot value of gold.
       À Current price of the front corn future.
       À The USDJPY exchange rate.

       À So our "Delta to S" or our "S Delta", is the change in the position
         value (in USD or GBP etc) for a small change in S.

                                                                              49
Delta

           Figure 6: Linear Relationship Between Underlying Variable and Value
         À For a linear position there is nice relationship between

           underlying and position value and Delta (the slope of the line) is
           close to constant.

                                                                                                                                                  50
Delta

       À If you have a delta of USD +1mm to Aluminium, where delta is
         measured as the sensitivity to a 1% increase in the Aluminium
         price.

       À You can neutralise this risk in a number of ways:
             À Sell Aluminium in the cash market.

       À The current spot price is $1,950 per tonne.

       À A 1% increase in spot price equates to a $19.50 increase in the price

          per tonne.                     1,000,000
                                            19.50
       À  Therefore   i  need  to  sell             =  51, 828  tonnes.

       À Sell Aluminium futures on LME:

       À Price is $2,000 per tonne and each contract is for 25 tonnes  each
         contract is worth $50,000.

       À A 1% increase in price changes the value of one contract by $500.
                                         1,000,000
       À  There  for  I  need  to  sell      500    =  2, 000  contracts.

       À Using options or positions in some highly correlated market

       (more complex and risky).

                                                                                51
Basis Risk

         À Basis Risk is an overused term in finance which causes much
           confusion. Here we using it to mean the residual risk when i
           hedge using something similar but not the same.

         À A good example is shorting an asset to hedge a long forward
           position.
                 À In order to sell short in the spot market you need to borrow the
                   asset. This exposes you to noisy borrowing costs and the risk of a
                   "short squeeze".
                 À This hedge will typically work with some p&l noise along the way
                   but there is a risk of a large loss.

         À In general, linear products have the attractive property that
           hedges protect against large as well as small changes in the
           value of the underlying. Additionally, once the hedge has been
           set up it never needs to be changed.

                                                                                                                                                   52
Non-linear Products

         À Options and many other derivatives have a nonlinear
           relationship with the value of the underlying asset price.

         À This nonlinearity creates two main problems for hedging:
                1. A hedged position will only remain delta neutral for small
                   movements in the price of the underlying asset.
               2. The hedge needs to be changed frequently - called dynamic
                   hedging.

         À Aside from option positions etc it is quite common for any
           portfolio, that is non-trival, to exhibit some non-linearlity for a
           variety of reasons.

                                                                                                                                                   53
Non-linear Products

À Take a simple example of a short position in 100,000 European
  call options on a stock:

À Current stock price S = $49.

À Strike price K = $50.

À Risk-free interest rate r = 5%.

À Volatility  = 20% per annum.

À  Time to option maturity is 20 weeks   =  20  = 0.3846 years.
                                            52

                                                                 54
Non-linear Products

      Figure 7: Value of Call Option as a Function of Stock Price (K = $50, rf = 5%,
      vol = 20%, time to maturity = 20 weeks - Source: Risk Management and
      Financial Institutions - J. Hull

                                                                                                                                                   55
Non-linear Products

         À Since the function is nonlinear, the delta of the option position
           changes as the stock price changes.

         À When the stock price is low:
                 À The value of the option is almost zero.
                 À The change in the value of the option as a result of a small change
                   in the stock price is also close to zero.
                 À  the delta of the option is close to zero.

         À When the stock price is high:
                 À The option is almost certain to be exercised.
                 À The delta of a position in the option is close to 1.0.
                 À This is because an increase of S in the stock price increases the
                   value of the option by  S.
                 À Exact same risk profile as a position in the underlying.

                                                                                                                                                  56
Non-linear Products

         À In the case of non-linear products our hedge needs to be
           monitored and adjusted periodically - typically called
           rebalancing.

         À If the assumptions of the pricing model were correct and our
           hedging scheme worked perfectly, the cost of hedging would,
           after discounting, be exactly equal to the Black¡Scholes¡Merton
           price. In reality there is always variation due to discrete
           rebalancing and transaction costs.

         À The aim of delta hedging is to keep the value of a
           position/portfolio as close to unchanged as possible.

         À Hedging a short option position will involve selling the
           underlying just after its price has gone down and buying it just
           after its price has gone up - loses money.

         À Hedging a long option position will involve selling the
           underlying just after its price has gone up and buying it just
           after its price has gone down - makes money.

                                                                                                                                                   57
Gamma

         À Since delta neutrality only provides local protection against the
           impact of changes in the price of the underlying asset, we need
           ways of measuring the higher order sensitivities of a
           position/portfolio.

         À Gamma  measures the extent to which large in the underlying
           price cause problems for our delta hedge.

         À It is the rate of change of the portfolio's delta with respect to
           the price of the underlying asset;
                                                       2P
                                                  = S2

         À Small gamma  delta changes slowly  portfolio rebalancing
           can be less frequent.

         À Large gamma  delta changes fast  risky to leave a
           delta-neutral portfolio unchanged for any length of time.

                                                                                                                                                  58
Gamma

         À A linear product has zero gamma and so can not be used to
           change the gamma of a portfolio.

         À In order to adjust the gamma of a portfolio we need to take a
           position in an instrument with a non-linear dependence on the
           underlying asset price.

         À It is important to note that adding option positions to the
           portfolio will likely change the delta of the portfolio. We must
           then rebalance our position in the underlying to maintain delta
           neutrality.

         À As with delta, the portfolio will be gamma neutral for a short
           period of time only.

         À Making a portfolio gamma neutral is the first correction for the
           fact that the position in the underlying asset cannot be changed
           continuously - gamma neutrality provides protection against
           larger movements in the asset price between delta rebalancing.

                                                                                                                                                   59
Gamma

                            Figure 8: Hedging Error Due to Non-Linearity

                                                                                                                                                  60
Vega

         À Another source of risk in a portfolio is the possibility that
           volatilities will change.

         À This is an obvious risk when the portfolio contains options as
           these are used to take explicit positions in the volatility of the
           underlying but it is present in some form in most portfolios.

         À Volatility measures our uncertainty about the future value of a
           variable. Is is often assumed to be constant, but in practice it is
           always changing.

         À The vega of a portfolio, V, is the rate of change of the value of
           the portfolio with respect to the volatility, , of the underlying
           asset price:
                                                        P
                                                  V = 

                                                                                                                                                   61
Vega

         À A large vega means the portfolio's value is very sensitive to
           changes in volatility.

         À A small vega means that volatility changes have relatively little
           impact on the value of the portfolio.

         À Like gamma, the vega of a portfolio can be changed by adding a
           position in an option.

         À However, a portfolio that is gamma neutral will not, in general,
           be vega neutral, and vice versa.

         À To make a portfolio both gamma and vega neutral, we need to
           trade at least two options and solve this form of sysyem:

                                        P + w1O1 + w2O2 = 0
                                       VP + w1VO1 + w2VO2 = 0

                                                                                                                                                   62
Vega

         À A long position in a vanilla option has a positive vega.
         À The volatilities of short-dated options tend to be more variable

           than the volatilities of longer options and so when calculating
           the vega of a portfolio we change the volatilities of short-dated
           options by more than that of long-dated options.

      Figure 9: Vega profile of a vanilla option as the underlying asset price varies.
      Note the vega is highest for ATM options.

                                                                                                                                                   63
Theta

         À An easily neglected risk is the change in the portfolio value due
           to the passage of time - this is referred to at theta .

         À It is usually calculated by keeping all other variables the the
           same and is often called time decay.

         À For long option position - theta is usually negative as options
           tends to become less valuable as the time remaining declines.

         À Theta is largest for ATM options and declines as the underling
           moves away from the strike price.
                                                        P
                                                   = t

                                                                                                                                                  64
Theta

         À Whilst there is no uncertainty about the passage of time theta
           quantifies something very important.

         À Whilst often only discussed for portfolios with options, anytime
           we have products with interest rate sensitivities, the portfolio
           value will change as time progresses.

         À It does not make sense to hedge against the effect of the
           passage of time on a portfolio in the same was as we hedge
           against changes in the value of the underlying.

         À It is a useful descriptive statistic for a portfolio.
         À For a delta-neutral portfolio there is an inverse relationship

           between theta gamma.

                                                                                                                                                  65
Taylor Expansions

À To see how this all fits together we "split" the change in portfolio
  value in the various components:

P                  =  P  S  +  P        +  P  t
                      S                    t

                               

                   +    2P  (S)2  +  2P  ()2  +  2P  (t)2
                        S2           2           t2

                   +   2P   (S)      +   2P   (St)
                      S                  St

                   +...

                                                                        66
Taylor Expansions

À We won't do into the details here but it turns out that for small
  time-steps we can ignore the t terms of order greater than one.

À If we assume that  is locally constant and focus on the terms
  involving S and t then we can easily get this very useful
  expression:

                   P  =  t  +  1  (S)2
                               2

À This makes clear the relationship between the  and  of a
  portfolio.

                                                                     67
Operational Risk
Operational Risk

         À Operational risk covers a wide range of issues and in banks and
           other highly regulated firms an attempt is made to quantify it
           and its likely impact before setting aside a reserve to cover likely
           losses.

         À In the less regulated world of funds the regulatory and reserve
           requirements may not be there but since most of the larger
           losses experienced by financial institutions have been as a result
           of operational rather than credit, market or other types of risk.

            The risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal
              processes, people, and systems or from external events.

                                                                                                                                                  68
Operational Risk

         À Internal fraud: Acts of a type intended to defraud,
           misappropriate property, or circumvent regulations, the law, or
           company policy involving at least one internal party. Examples
           include intentional misreporting of positions, employee theft,
           insider trading on an employee's own account, and rogue
           trading.

         À External fraud: Acts by a third party of a type intended to
           defraud, misappropriate property, or circumvent the law.
           Examples include robbery, forgery, check fraud, and damage
           from computer hacking.

         À Employment practices and workplace safety: Acts inconsistent
           with employment, health or safety laws or agreements or that
           result in payment of personal injury claims or claims relating to
           diversity or discrimination issues. Examples include worker
           compensation claims, violation of employee health and safety
           rules, discrimination claims, and general liability .

                                                                                                                                                  69
Operational Risk

À Clients, products, and business practices: Unintentional or

negligent failure to meet a professional obligation to clients.

Examples are fiduciary breaches, misuse of confidential

customer information, improper trading activities on the bank's

account, money laundering and the sale of unauthorised

products.

À Damage to physical assets: Loss or damage to physical assets

from natural disasters or other events. Examples include

terrorism, vandalism, earthquakes, fires, and floods.

À Business disruption and system failures: Disruption of business

or system failures. Examples include hardware and software

failures, telecommunication problems, and utility outages.

À Process management: Failed transactions and disputes with

trade counterparties and vendors. Examples include data entry

errors, collateral management failures, incomplete legal

documentation, unapproved access given to clients' accounts

and vendor disputes.                                               70
Fund Characteristics

         À It is important to consider the nature of the fund when thinking
           about risk management.

         À Hedge funds typically pursue absolute performance targets and
           will use any available tool at their disposal: leverage, margin,
           short selling using derivative.

         À Many hedge fund managers have large amounts of their own
           capital in the fund and have a performance-based
           compensation structure which seeks to align their risk with that
           of heir investors. This structure means that the investor is "short
           a call option on the value of the fund portfolio".

         À Hedge fund returns display non-normal characteristics such as
           skewness, excess kurtosis, as well as serial correlation.
           Therefore, traditional measures of performance such as the
           Sharpe ratio are insufficient to assess investments. The risk
           profile is often option-like due to trading dynamically.

                                                                                                                                                   71
Fund Characteristics

         À Some funds show insignificant unconditional correlations with
           major financial markets, such as the equity or bond markets but
           show significant time-varying conditional correlations with the
           same risk factors.

         À The CTA Equal Weighted index shows no relationship with the
           S&P 500 index return in bull markets, but a significant and
           positive relationship in bear markets. This suggests that CTA
           managers short the S&P 500 index in bear markets while finding
           other sources of performance in bull markets.

         À Similarly, the Global Macro index shows two significantly
           different regimes with conditional correlation coefficients of 0.33
           and 0.17 to S&P500 in between bull and bear markets,
           respectively.

         À This non-linearity in hedge fund returns is part of the attraction
           of hedge funds and has led to the rise of several alternative
           beta replication products.

                                                                                                                                                   72
Fund Correlation

Figure 10: Correlation between: CTA (CTA), Equity Market Neutral (EMN) &  73

Global Macro (GLMA)
Fund Correlation

     Decisions/Issues for an Equity Long-Short Fund:

         À Investment style (value, growth, etc.).
         À Fundamental analysis (earnings, analyst forecasts, accounting

           data).
         À Factor exposures (S&P 500 Index, industries, sectors,

           characteristics).
         À Portfolio optimization (mean-variance analysis, market

           neutrality).
         À Stock loan considerations (hard-to-borrow securities, "short

           squeezes").
         À Execution costs (price impact, commissions, borrowing rate,

           short rebate).
         À Benchmarks and tracking error (T-bill rate versus S&P 500).

                                                                                                                                                   74
Fund Correlation

     Decisions/Issues for a Global Macro Fund:
         À Yield-curve models (equilibrium versus arbitrage models).
         À Prepayment models (for mortgage-backed securities).
         À Optionality (call, convertible, and put features).
         À Credit risk (defaults, rating changes, etc.).
         À Inflationary pressures & central bank activity.
         À Other macroeconomic factors and events.

                                                                                                                                                   75
Risk-Management Framework

         À Risk controls are critical to ensuring appropriate governance OF
           algorithmic trading.

         À These controls express the risk appetite of the firm and make
           clear any restrictions on the types of security that can be traded
           and eligibility of counterparties.

         À All trading activity should adhere to the strategic objectives, risk
           strategy, and governance of the firm.

                                                                                                                                                   76
Governance

         À The governance framework defines lines of responsibility for:
                 À Overseeing the execution of the algorithmic trading policy.
                 À Monitoring adherence to that policy.
                 À Reviewing and approving algorithms in line with the algorithm
                   approval process.
                 À Assigning ownership of algorithms and risk controls.
                 À Assigning ownership for the kill-switch controls.
                 À Setting out and overseeing a review process for algorithmic
                   trading incidents.

                                                                                                                                                   77
Governance

         À All strategies suffer drawdowns which may last a few minutes or
           a few years.

         À To stay in business it is essential to:
                 À Keep drawdowns limited to a tolerable level.
                 À Be positioned to use optimal leverage to achieve maximum
                   possible growth.
                 À Optimally allocate capital across multiple strategies.

           so as to maximise overall risk-adjusted return.

                                                                                                                                                   78
Optimal Scaling for Strategies
Optimal Capital Allocation

         À When we have multiple strategies, each with their own expected
           returns and standard deviations we need to decide how to
           allocate capital between them 1

         À Additionally we must decide on the leverage.
         À Our objective is to maximise long-term wealth which is the same

           as maximising the long-term compounded growth rate g of your
           portfolio.
         À Assume that the probability distribution of the returns, net of all
           costs, of each of the trading strategies is Gaussian with mean mi
           and standard deviation si.
         À Denote the optimal fractions of your equity that you should
           allocate to each of your n strategies by a vector
           F = (f1 , f2 , . . . , fn)T

        1(Thorp, 1997) has an excellent discussion of this problem.

                                                                                                                                                   79
Optimal Capital Allocation

À The optimal allocation is given by:
                                       F = C-1M

À Where C is the covariance matrix and M = (m1, m2, . . . , mn)T is
  the vector of mean returns.

À When the strategies are statistically independent, the covariance

matrix becomes a diagonal matrix, with variance of the

individual strategies on the diagonal. This leads to an especially

simple formula:                    mi
                                   si2
                            fi  =

À This is the famous Kelly formula and it gives the optimal
  leverage one should employ for a particular trading strategy.

                                                                     80
Optimal Capital Allocation

À Given uncertainty about parameter estimates and the fact that
  return distributions are not really Gaussian we often cut this
  recommended leverage in half for safety - called half-Kelly
  betting.

À It is important to note that we have ignored the possibility that
  some positions may offset each other which should allow for
  higher leverage than the formula suggests.

À What is this maximum compounded growth rate achieved by this

allocation:                             SR2
                                         2
                            g  =  r  +

À So if we employ optimal leverage/allocation, higher Sharpe
  ration  higher long-term wealth.

                                                                     81
Optimal Capital Allocation

         À The continuous updating of the capital allocation should occur
           at least once at the end of each trading day.

         À In addition to updating the capital allocation according to F we
           must also periodically update F itself using the most recent
           trailing mean return and standard deviation.

         À The length of the lookback period for the variables depends on
           the average holding period of your strategy - longer holding
           period  longer lookback period.

         À A short lookback period has the advantage of gradually
           reduceing exposure to strategies that have been losing their
           performance.

         À It should be possible to update F at least daily .

                                                                                                                                                  82
Kelly for Risk Managment

À It can be easily seen that the Kelly formula will advise reducing

the portfolio size in the face of losses.

À Selling at a loss is a frequent result of risk management

regardless of the approach used - risk management dictates

that you should reduce your position size whenever there is a

loss, even though it means realising that loss.

À Optimal leverage dictates that you increase your position size

when your strategy generates profits.

À Selling as a result of losses is believed by some to be the cause

of "financial contagion" affecting many funds simultaneously

when one faces a large loss 2.

À Contagion occurs because a large loss by one hedge fund causes

it to sell off some large positions which causes the prices of the

securities to fall. Other hedge funds holding similar positions

will then suffer large losses also, causing their own risk

management system to sell off their own positions, and so on.
2see article "What Happened to the Quants in August 2007?" by Amir Khandani and
                                                                                 83

Andrew Lo
Kelly for Risk Managment

         À A lower leverage implies a smaller size of selling required for
           risk management.

         À Some traders limit their portfolio size further with additional
           constraints due to the faulty assumption that the return
           distribution is Gaussian.

         À The probability of an event far, far from the mean is much higher
           than suggested by the Gaussian distribution.

         À To handle extreme events that fall outside the Gaussian
           distribution, we can use a backtest to roughly estimate the
           maximum one-period loss historically.

         À You should bear in mind the maximum one-period drawdown
           you are willing to suffer. Dividing this by the maximum historical
           loss gives a good indication of target leverage. The leverage to
           use is always the smaller of the (half) Kelly leverage and the
           maximum leverage obtained using the worst historical loss.

                                                                                                                                                  84
Stop-Losses

         À Some believe that it is good practice to have a stop loss on
           every trade.

         À It is a common fallacy to believe that imposing stop losses will
           prevent the portfolio from suffering catastrophic losses.

         À However, when a catastrophic event occurs, securities prices will
           drop discontinuously and stop loss orders will be filled at prices
           much worse than those before the event.

         À So, by exiting the positions, we are actually realising the huge
           loss and not avoiding it.

         À For stop loss to be beneficial, we must believe that we are in a
           trending regime. In other words, prices will get worse within the
           expected lifetime of our trade.

         À If the market is mean reverting, we will eventually recoup our
           losses if we didn't exit the position too quickly.

                                                                                                                                                  85
Model Risk

         À Model risk refers to the possibility that losses are due to the fact
           that the trading model is wrong.

         À It could be wrong for a large number of reasons including:
                 À Data-snooping.
                 À Survivorship bias.
                 À Foresight bias.

         À Model risk can also come from increased competition from
           other institutional traders all running the same strategy as you.

         À It could be a result of some fundamental change (regime shift)
           in market structure that eliminated the edge of your trading
           model.

                                                                                                                                                  86
Software Risk

         À This refers to situations where the system that generates trades
           does not faithfully reflect your backtest model due to software
           bugs.

         À You should compare the trades generated by your automated
           system with the theoretical trades generated by your backtest
           system to ensure that they are the same.

         À There will always be some bugs and it pays to check each stage
           of the process.

                                                                                                                                                   87
Psychological Biases

         À There are many important psychological biases, details of which
           can be found in one of the many papers on behavioural finance.

         À In particular, despair and greed, can lead to over-leveraging:
                 À In despair, one tries to recoup the losses by adding fresh capital.
                 À In greed, one adds capital too quickly after initial successes.

         À Therefore, the golden rule of risk management is to keep the
           size of your portfolio under control at all times.

         À The best approach is to start with a small portfolio and
           gradually gain psychological preparedness, discipline and
           confidence in your models.

         À The greatest risk lies in a model that has performed model that
           is at the greatest risk of huge loss due to overconfidence and
           over-leverage.

                                                                                                                                                  88
Value at Risk and Related
Appraches
Value at Risk

                         Figure 11: The loss V corresponding to an X% VaR

         À The X% VaR for time T is satisfies the statement "We are X%
           certain that we will not lose more than $V in time T."

         À It is a function of two parameters: the time horizon, T, and the
           confidence level, X%.

         À It is the loss level during a time period of length T that we are
           X% certain will not be exceeded.

                                                                                                                                                  89
Value at Risk

         À VaR is an attractive measure because it is a single easy to
           understand $ number.

         À The idea of compressing all the Greek letters for all the market
           sensitivities in a portfolio into a single number is very appealing.

         À However, used to limit the risks taken by a trader, it often leads
           to undesirable results.

         À A 1-day 99% VaR of $10 million can be achieved as follows:
                 À A portfolio with a 99.1% chance that the daily loss is less than $10
                   million and a 0.9% chance of a loss of $500 million.

         À A probability distribution like this is not that unusual as many
           trading strategies give a high probability of good returns and a
           small probability of a huge loss e.g. short option type strategies.

                                                                                                                                                  90
Why not VaR?

         À VaR is a powerful tool in many situations. However in the case
           of hedge funds it has significant limitations.

         À VaR has problems capturing the full spectrum of risks identified
           in the lists above.

         À VaR may not be ideally suited to some investments such as e.g.
           emerging market debt, risk arbitrage, or convertible bond
           arbitrage.

         À VaR does not capture liquidity risk, event risk, credit risk, factor
           exposures, or time-varying risks due to dynamic trading
           strategies that may be systematically keyed to market
           conditions.

         À VaR is notoriously difficult to estimate as "tail events" happen
           rarely and historical data will contain only a few of these events,
           generally too small a sample to yield reliable estimates of tail
           probabilities.

                                                                                                                                                   91
Why not VaR?

         À Finally, VaR is an unconditional measure of risk as the
           calculations are based on the unconditional distribution of a
           portfolio's profit and loss.

         À For active risk management, conditional measures are more
           relevant, especially for investment strategies that respond
           actively to changing market conditions.

         À A portfolio VaR of $10mm for the next week is less informative
           than: VaR is $100mm if the S&P 500 declines by 5% or more and
           $1 million otherwise.

         À VaR calculations make assumptions about the unconditional
           correlations between components of the portfolio, but we have
           learned the hard way that correlations are highly dependent on
           market conditions and that securities which seem uncorrelated
           during normal times may become extremely highly correlated
           during market turmoil.

                                                                                                                                                   92
Why not VaR?

         À Finally, VaR is an unconditional measure of risk as the
           calculations are based on the unconditional distribution of a
           portfolio's profit and loss.

         À For active risk management, conditional measures are more
           relevant, especially for investment strategies that respond
           actively to changing market conditions.

         À A portfolio VaR of $10mm for the next week is less informative
           than: VaR is $100mm if the S&P 500 declines by 5% or more and
           $1 million otherwise.

         À VaR calculations make assumptions about the unconditional
           correlations between components of the portfolio, but we have
           learned the hard way that correlations are highly dependent on
           market conditions and that securities which seem uncorrelated
           during normal times may become extremely highly correlated
           during market turmoil.

                                                                                                                                                   93
Expected Shortfall

         À A better approach is to use expected shortfall (ES), also called
           conditional value at risk.

         À ES tries to quantify the expected loss given a large loss.
         À ES is the expected loss during time T conditional on the loss

           being greater than the X% VaR.
         À Setting an ES limit rather than a VaR limit for traders makes it

           less likely that they will be able to game the system.
         À ES has better properties than VaR in that it always recognizes

           the benefits of diversification.
         À ES does not have the simplicity of VaR and it is more difficult to

           back-test a procedure for calculating it.

                                                                                                                                                  94
Features of a Good Risk Measure

        1. Monotonicity: A portfolio which gives a worse result than
           another for every state of the world should give a higher
           measure.

        2. Translation Invariance: Adding an amount of cash K to a
           portfolio should reduce its risk by K.

        3. Homogeneity: Changing the size of a portfolio by a factor 
           while keeping the relative amounts of different items in the
           portfolio the same should result in the risk measure being
           multiplied by .

        4. Subadditivity: The risk of two portfolios once merged should be
           no greater than the sum of their risks before they were merged.

                                                                                                                                                  95
Choice of Parameters

         À The choice of the time horizon depends on the portfolio.
                 À For liquid and actively instruments it makes sense to use a short
                   time horizon (a few days).
                 À A longer time horizon can make sense if the composition of the
                   portfolio changes frequently.

         À If the liquidity of a portfolio varies from one instrument to
           another, the definition of VaR or ES can be changed to
           incorporate different horizons for different instruments.

                                                                                                                                                  96
Changing the Horizon

         À We often start by calculating VaR or ES for a time horizon of one
           day.

         À The the usual assumption is:
                                    t-day VaR = 1-day VaR Î t
                                      t-day ES = 1-day ES Î t

         À These are only true when the changes in the value of the
           portfolio on successive days are i.i.d. Gaussian with mean zero.

                                                                                                                                                   97
Changing the Horizon

À In reality, the changes in the value of a portfolio from one day to
  the next are not independent.

À Let Pt be the change in the value of a portfolio on day t and the
  first-order autocorrelation between Pt and Pt-1 is  for all t.

À Let the variance of Pt be 2 for all t.

À The the variance of Pt-1 + Pt is:
                          2 + 2 + 22 = 2 (1 + ) 2

À  TcahlecucloartreeltahteiosntabnedtwarededneviPattiaonndof  Pt-Tt=s1is Pst  which  allows  us  to
                                                                              as:

    T + 2(T - 1) + 2(T - 2)2 + 2(T - 3)3 + À À À + 2T

                                                                                                     98
Historical Simulation

         À A common way of calculating VaR/ES is using historical
           simulation.

         À This involves using past data as a guide to what will happen in
           the future.

         À The first step is to identify the market variables or risk factors
           affecting the portfolio - indices, exchange rates, interest rates,
           volatilities, etc.

         À We then collect the history of these variables over our lookback
           window (say) 500 days which is roughly two years.

         À We now have 500 different 1-day scenarios.
         À The dollar change in the overall value of the portfolio over each

           historic 1 day period is calculated.

                                                                                                                                                  99
Historical Simulation

         À These 500 numbers define a probability distribution for daily
           loss.

         À For instance the The 99th percentile loss corresponds to the fifth
           worst outcome.

         À We are 99% certain that we will not experience a loss greater
           than this number if the past 500 days are representative of what
           will happen between today and tomorrow.

         À The 1% ES can also be estimated by averaging the four worst
           losses.

         À One thing to note is that for some variables such as interest
           rates, credit spreads, and volatilities, actual rather than
           percentage changes in market variables are typically considered.

                                                                                                                                                 100
Extreme Value Theory

         À Extreme value theory is the science of estimating the tails of a
           distribution and it can be used to improve VaR or ES estimates
           and to help in situations where we want to estimate VaR with a
           very high confidence level.

         À It provides useful tools for smoothing and extrapolating the tails
           of an empirical distribution.

         À The key result in EVT shows that the tails of a range of different
           probability distributions share common properties.

         À Suppose that F(v) be the cumulative distribution function for
           some variable v and that u is a value of v in the right-hand tail
           of the distribution. Then:

                                 P[v  [u, u + y]] = F(u + y) - F(u)
                                          P[v > u] = 1 - F(u)

                                                                                                                                                 101
Extreme Value Theory

À Define Fu(y) as the probability that v lies between u and u + y

conditional on v > u.           F(u + y) - F(u)
                                    1 - F(u)
                      Fu(y)  =

À This variable Fu(y) defines the right tail of the probability
  distribution.

À It is the cumulative probability distribution for the amount by
  which v exceeds u given that it does exceed u.

À For a wide class of distributions F(v) the distribution of Fu(y)
  converges to a Generalised Pareto Distribution as the threshold
  u is increased.

                                                                    102
Extreme Value Theory

À The generalised Pareto (cumulativ[e) distr]ibution is:
                                 1+
                      G,(y) = 1        

À The parameter  is the shape parameter and determines the
  heaviness of the tail of the distribution and  is a scale
  parameter - these must be estimated from data using maximum
  likelihood methods.

À When the underlying variable v has a Gaussian distribution,
   = 0.12.

À For heavier tails, the value of  increases - for most financial
  data,  is in the range 0.1 to 0.4.

                                                                   103
Extreme Value Theory

         À If we are interested in the left tail of the probability distribution,
           we can work with v instead of v.

         À A good rule of thumb is that u should be approximately equal to
           the 95th percentile of the empirical distribution.

         À EVT is a way of smoothing the tails of the distribution of
           portfolio daily changes calculated using historical simulation
           and leads to estimates of VaR and ES that reflect the whole
           shape of the tail of the distribution, not just the positions of a
           few losses in the tails.

                                                                                                                                                 104
Factor Models
Factor Models

         À Factor models are an attempt to define the relationships
           between asset returns in a portfolio.

         À The basic premise is that similar assets should display similar
           returns.

         À These similarities can be in terms of market information,
           fundamental company data or exposure to other factors.

         À The goal is to identify common factors which capture common
           characteristics of different securities, and determine the return
           sensitivity of each security to each factor.

         À The models can use a combination of macroeconomic,
           fundamental, and statistical data.

                                                                                                                                                 105
Factor Models

         À Our model will build on the APT approach.
         À An asset's return is broken out into the return due to a number

           of individual factors and a portion unique to the asset and not
           due to the common factors.
         À The contribution of each factor is the product of the asset's
           exposure or weight in the factor and the return of that factor.
         À The total excess return equation for a multiple-factor model can
           be summarized as:

                             rti = 1f1t + 2ft2 + 3ft3 + 4ft4 + À À À + ti

                                                                                                                                                 106
Covariance Estimation

         À Modelling portfolio risk requires an accurate estimate of the
           covariance matrix of security returns.

         À The obvious was to do this is to use the history of security
           returns to compute each variance and covariance.

         À There are two serious problems with this approach:
                 À If we want to estimating the covariance matrix for, 3,000 assets, we
                   need at least 3,000 periods of history (12 years of daily data).
                 À It is subject to estimation error due to sample size and outliers etc.

                                                                                                                                                 107
Covariance Estimation

         À A critical component of a portfolio model is the factor
           covariance matrix.

         À This matrix contains the variances and covariances of the
           common factors.

         À In order to estimate the risk of a portfolio, we must consider the
           portfolio's exposures to the factors plus the risk of each factor
           and the covariance between factors.

         À When estimating covariance a good factor model can help us
           avoid finding spurious relationships.

                                                                                                                                                 108
Covariance Estimation

À The covariance for m factors will look like:

  Var(f1),           Cov(f1, f2),  Cov(f1, f2),  . . . , Cov(f1, fm)  
                      Var(f2),     Cov(f2, f2),
  Cov(f2,    f1  ),        ...                   ...,   Cov(f2,    fm)
        ...                              ...       ...        ...

  Cov(fm, f1), Cov(fm, f2), Cov(fm, f3), . . . , Var(fm)

                                                                        109
Covariance Shrinkage

À In general we have a matrix Y which has shape (T Î N) of
  historical returns which has T observations of N securities.

À The empirical covariance is estimated as:

                      E  =  1  YT  Y
                            T

À If T is small relative to N this estimator of covariance is very
  unstable.

À It is possible to come up with estimators that are much better in
  terms of mean squared error.

À If T < N the empirical estimate of the covariance matrix
  becomes singular and can't be computed.

                                                                     110
Covariance Shrinkage

         À Shrinkage methods allow us to estimate covariance when we
           don't have as many observations as we would like.

         À They provide a way of reducing the variance of a covariance
           estimate E from the true covariance C i.e.
                                             minVar[C - E]

         À A popular linear shrinkage estimator is the Ledoit-Wolf which is
           the convex combination of the estimate E and some target A:

                                          E = A + (1 - )E
           where  is selected to maximise the expected accuracy of the
           shrunken estimator.

                                                                                                                                                  111
Covariance Shrinkage

         À The shrinkage parameter  can be estimated using
           cross-validation, or by using an analytic estimate.

         À The resulting regularised estimate E has been shown to
           outperform the maximum likelihood estimator for small
           samples.

         À As the sample grows, the shrinkage intensity will reduce to zero,
           hence in this case the shrinkage estimator will be identical to
           the empirical estimator.

         À The shrinkage estimator is always positive definite and well
           conditioned.

         À There are many targets used including:
                 À The identity matrix multiplied by the average sample variance.
                 À Diagonal matrix with the estimated variances the diagonal.
                 À The above with all off-diagonal elements equal to the average
                   across all covariances.

                                                                                                                                                  112
Principal Components Analysis

         À Rather than specifying the factors, PCA offers a completely
           statistical approach to factor analysis.

         À It just uses the data as provided to find the factors which
           explain the highest amount of observed variance down to those
           which explain the least.

         À It is very useful for analysing datasets which have a large
           number of dimensions/features per observation. PCA reduces
           the dimensionality of a dataset by transforming the data into a
           new coordinate system where the variation in the data can be
           described with fewer dimensions than the initial data.

                                                                                                                                                  113
Principal Components Analysis

         À For something like our interest rate risk we easily calculate our
           exposure to each of 15 different maturities on the yield curve.

         À This seems unnecessary since the variables are highly correlated
           - a trader is fairly well hedged if they have a large positive
           exposure to the 5y rate and a similar large negative exposure to
           the 10y rate.

         À For a yield curve it turns out that the first factor (PC1)
           corresponds to a parallel shift in the yield curve.

         À The second factor (PC2) corresponds to a steepening/flattening
           of the curve - the long and short end of the curve move in
           opposite directions.

         À The third factor (PC3) corresponds to a bowing of the curve - the
           long and short end move in the same direction with the middle
           of the curve moving in the opposite direction.

                                                                                                                                                  114
Algorithmic Trading - A Practitioners Guide

Backtesting & Performance Measurement

Nick Firoozye / Brian Healy
07 September 2023
Outline

     1. Performance Indicators
     2. Illustrating Drawdowns
     3. Python for Analysis
     4. Performance Indicator Comparisons
     5. A Realistic Backtest
     6. Optimizing Hyperparameters

          Common Methods
          Bayesian Optimisation
     7. Multi-Objective Optimization
     8. Summary

                                                                                                                                                    1
Performance Indicators
Performance Indicators

Performance Indicators
Paper: How sharp is the Sharpe ratio

À Sharpe Ratio                        Á
                                        ,
                            SR   =    

where Á is the average return and  volatility, also called the

risk-adjusted return, is the most common.

À Value-at-Risk (VaR) is the value such that, taking the cumulative
  distribution function of the strategy returns,
  CDF(-VaR()) = 1 - . VaR() represents a potential relative
  loss of the strategy for a given confidence level ,

À Conditional Sharpe Ratio

                            CSR  =    Á
                                    ES() ,

where ES() is the expected shortfall, i.e. the average of the

strategy returns that are lower than the VaR().                      2
Performance Indicators

Performance Indicators

À Burke Ratio                  Á

                        BR  =          i      DDi2  ,

where the i-th drawdown DDi within the interval considered is
                   ThroughValuei -PeakValuei
given by  DDi   =            PeakValue)       where    the i-th through value

of the price time series has to follow in time the i-th peak value,

À Maximum Drawdown

          MDD      =  MinThroughValue - MaxPeakValue   ,
                                   MaxPeakValue

where the minimum through value of the price time series has
to follow in time the maximum peak value,

À Calmar Ratio                      Á
                                  MDD .
                        CR     =

                                                                               3
Illustrating Drawdowns
Analysing Drawdowns

     Analysing Drawdowns

                 Figure 1: Strategy Cumulative Return/PNL G Gunderson blog

                                                                                                                                                    4
Analysing Drawdowns

     Analysing Drawdowns - Plotting Cumulative PnL

                   Figure 2: Cumulative Returns with DDs G Gunderson blog

                                                                                                                                                    5
Analysing Drawdowns

     Analysing Drawdowns - Drawdown Plot and MaxDD

                    Figure 3: Drawdown plot with Max DD G Gunderson blog

                                                                                                                                                    6
Analysing Drawdowns

     Analysing Drawdowns - Identifying Longest DD

                 Figure 4: Strategy Cumulative Return/PNL G Gunderson blog

                                                                                                                                                    7
Python for Analysis
Annualising Returns

     Annualising Returns/Vol

                                           Figure 5: Annualising

                                                                                                                                                    8
SR and Value-at-risk

     VaR and SR

                      Figure 6: VAR and SR  9
MaxDD

     MaxDD

                                               Figure 7: MaxDD

                                                                                                                                                   10
MaxDD Length

     MaxDD-Length 1

                                               Figure 8: MaxDD

                                                                                                                                                   11
MaxDD Length

     MaxDD-Length 2

                                               Figure 9: MaxDD

                                                                                                                                                   12
Calmar Etc

     Calmar etc

                                              Figure 10: Calmar

                                                                                                                                                   13
Omega Sortino

     Omega Sortino

                                      Figure 11: Omega and Sortino

                                                                                                                                                   14
Tail Ratio etc

     Tail Ratio

                                            Figure 12: Tail Ratio

                                                                                                                                                   15
Performance Indicator
Comparisons
Performance Measure Comparisons

     Performance Measure Comparisons

                                                                                                                                                   16

                                          Figure 13: Google Sheet
Performance Measure Comparisons

     Performance Measure Comparisons

                                          Figure 14: Google Sheet

                                                                                                                                                   17
Perf Meas Comparisons

     Performance Measure Comparisons

                                          Figure 15: Google Sheet

                                                                                                                                                   18
A Realistic Backtest
Backtesting

     Realistic Backtests
         À Backtests should include all realiastic assumptions
         À Historic costing or costing model (i.e., mid, bid-ask spread,
           market impact measure) for market orders
         À Elements like roll and roll cost (i.e., when rolling from ERZ3 to
           ERH4 when we come to the Dec IMM date, we usually pay 1/2 *
           bid-ask spread for the two trades)
         À Financing if bought on a margin, including long and/or short
           side for most costly version)
         À Can summarize returns before and after costs, etc.

                                                                                                                                                   19
Recording Backtests

     Screen Recording

                                                                                                                                                  20
Backtesting

     Realistic Backtests
         À Backtests Take time
         À Costly
         À May involve many simulations
         À Many performance measures need calculation
         À Many other measures for sanity checks etc.

                                                                                                                                                   21
Optimizing Hyperparameters
Hyperparameter Optimisations

     Hyperparameter Optimisation
         À Parameters:
                 À Rolling Betas (RLS, EWRLS)
                 À Changing Vol Estimates (GARCH model)
                 À Betas (OLS)
         À Hyperparmaters:
                 À Multipliers (in an optimisation problem)
                 À Risk aversion (in a utility) and Thresholds
                 À Exponential Weights (EWRLS) / Learning Decay
                 À Rolling windows (RLS)
                 À Epoch length
                 À Shrinkage parameters
         À Some intrinsic overlap and ambiguity.

                                                                                                                                                   22
Hyperparameter Optimisations

     Hyperparameter Tuning
         À Manual Tuning
         À Grid Search
         À Random Search
         À Bayesian Optimization
         À Tree-structured Parzen Estimators (TPE)

                                                                                                                                                   23
Tuning Algos

     Hyperparameter Tuning Algos
         À HyperOpt
         À Scikit-Optimize
         À Optuna
         À GPyOpt
         À Many others

     We will look a bit more at Optuna, commonly used in Kaggle
     competitions - Uses a combination of search techniques including
     random starting TPE with Bandits and early stopping. Can easily be
     parallelized (e.g., dask).

                                                                                                                                                   24
Bayesian Optimisation

     Bayesian Optimisation Example

Figure 16: Example Function to Maximize Nanonets Blog

Global Optimization is part art, part science. Bayesian optimization  25

uses global data more efficiently. Better if function valuations are
Bayesian Optimisation

     Bayesian Optimisation Example

               Figure 17: Two evaluation - GP Posterior Density Nanonets Blog

                                                                                                                                                  26
Bayesian Optimisation

     Bayesian Optimisation Example

                                         Figure 18: Nanonets Blog

                                                                                                                                                   27
Bayesian Optimisation

     Bayesian Optimisation Example

                                         Figure 19: Nanonets Blog

                                                                                                                                                  28
Multi-Objective Optimization
Multiple Objectives

     Multiple Objectives
         À Many design problems involve a large number of competing
           objectives
         À These are common in areas of self-driving vehicles,
           search-engine optimization, and many other areas
         À Technically MOO is at play in mean-variance optimization in
           finance: we want to maximize returns while minimizing risk.
         À Trying to do both simultaneously leads to what is known as a
           Pareto solution - which gives us the efficient frontier

                                                                                                                                                   29
Multi Objective Optimisation

     MOO
         À Plan to simultaneously

                                            f1,opt = max f1(x)
                                            f1,opt = max f1(x)
                                            f2,opt = max f2(x)
                                            f3,opt = max f3(x)

                                                 ......

         À One solution is Pareto solution
         À if x is a Pareto solution then x + x may improve one if the fi but

           only at the expense of other fj.

                                                                                                                                                  30
Multi Objective Optimisations

     Multi-Objective Optimisation - MVO

  Figure 20: Mean vs Stdev and Random Portfolios

À The efficient frontier involves all portfolios which cannot be
  improved, i.e., if the mean return goes up, the risk will also be
  greater, or if the risk is lessened the mean will also be lessened.

À `Technically each is a solution of E[R] - /2Var[R] for different

                                                                       31
Multi Objective Optimisations

     Multi-Objective Optimisation - Random Sampling

                Figure 21: Randomly sampled ML Model configs vs Objectives

                                                                                                                                                   32
Multi Objective Optimisations

     Multi-Objective Optimisation - Pareto Boundary

      Figure 22: Pareto Frontier is not stochastically dominated FasatForward Labs
      Blog

                                                                                                                                                   33
Multiple Objectives

     Multiple Objectives- Linear Combinations
         À MOO works for up to 4 objective functions
         À MOO is equivalent to having linear combinations, i.e.,
                            max f1(x) + 2f2(x) + 3f3(x) + À À À nfn(x)
         À Having more than four objectives  Many-Objective
           Optimization (MaOO)
         À Some methods for MaOO include finding PCAs of objectives and
           then using Pareto-methods on the principal components
         À Once the parameter space is explored, a single choice must be
           done!

                                                                                                                                                   34
Summary
Summary

     Summary
         À Performance Indicators
         À Drawdowns
         À None is perfect
         À Backtesting
         À Hyperparamter Optimization
         À MOO

                                                                                                                                                   35
