Algorithmic Trading &
Quantitative Strategies

                  Lecture 6 (4/16/2024)
            Giuseppe Paleologo (gardener)
Today's Session

  There will be a short multiple-answer quiz at the end of the
      lecture.

  Please send answers in the form

          1-a
          2-c
         ...

      To gp2642@nyu.edu. You will have 5 minutes
Recap on Last Quiz                                4. Should you shrink the factor
                                                        covariance matrix?
 1. In Fundamental Models, you can't use
       directly the following data                         a. Yes, you should almost shrink a
                                                                   covariance matrix
          a. Company trailing earnings
          b. Company forward earnings                      b. Yes, we have not enough observations
          c. Inflation rate (CPI)                          c. Yes, because of spikes
          d. Trailing 10-day returns
                                                  5. Should you use a non-quadratic loss
 2. Is it better to have a peaky
       spectrum?                                           a. Yes. It could be more robust to
                                                                   outliers
          a. Yes because there are fewer
                  eigenvalues                              b. No. Mismatch with factor returns
                                                           c. Maybe. For example penalties
          b. Yes because they are more separated
                  from the bulk                   6. Dynamic Volatility Adjustment

          c. Not necessarily                               a. Only makes the model more
                                                                   responsive
 3. Bulk eigenvalues correspond to
                                                           b. Makes the model more predictive of
          a. Idiosyncratic variances                               risk
          b. Factor variances
          c. A combination of the two                      c. Makes the model more responsive but
                                                                   not more predictive
Topics

  Fundamental Model: residual variance estimation

          Practical considerations: z-scoring and reducing turnover

  Advanced Portfolio Construction
  Next Time (final lecture):

          Backtesting
Residual Volatilities

Do not reinvent the wheel (mostly). We have seen the bassic
ingredients before. Steps:

1. EWMA
2. Ledoit-Wolf Shrinkage
3. Short-Term Volatility Updating
4. Cluster Analysis
Short-Term Idio Updating

  You can actually use exactly the same approach as factors, with
      identity correlation. It still works

  But it works much better if you include in the model the earning
      dates and introduce an asset weight that gets smaller the farther
      away from the earning date:
STIU

  And then the same machinery but easier: measure the
      "cross-sectional vol surprise". Easier because C=I

  And then update the affected vols:
Clustering

  Approximate and exact models. The former have diagonal idio
      covariances

  Sparse is fine as well. A simple thresholding (Bickel-Levina, El
      Karoui 2008) will take you a long way.

  The theoretical thresholds (sqrt(log n/T)) don't work well in my
      subjective experience. You have to do a bit of trial and error.

  Usually clusters correspond to "insensitive region" of the
      threshold (makes sense), and the cluster elements are close in
      factor loading space.
Clusters and Sparsity
How Do You Use This?

 For risk, obviously

         Risk may be under/overestimated

 And for alpha

         Clusters are sub-sub-sub...-industry. Themes, on which people bet
         The assets are cointegrated. Identify rich and cheap assets
Advanced Portfolio Construction

  MVO is widely used. Also widely criticized, also the criticism is
      often a bit vague and qualitative. "Error maximization" and the
      like.

  Three questions:
1. What is the impact of error on input data?
2. Are constraints good or bad for your portfolio health
3. What constraints?
The Simplest Example

Two assets, Sharpes s , s , and correlation 

                                                12

So simple and yet so rich:
1. Second asset has no alpha and positive correlation? It's a hedge
2. Second asset has alpha, but is positively correlated? Relative

      Value
Let's Introduce Errors

True Sharpe is s tilde. Assume
How much do we loss in realized sharpe?
Assume error in correlation. Below, and error of +/-0.1:
Constraints

Sweeping statement: Everything in life has a) an objective; b) some
data; c) some structure. Constraints are the structure. But why?

1. Investors' preferences
2. Tactical considerations
3. Regulatory considerations
4. Fiduciary considerations
5. Implementation considerations
Linear Constraints

1. Long-only
2. GMV constraint. Not linear but linearized with a trick.

3. Long-Short
4. Exposure constraint
5. Constant unit trading costs. Also linearizable
Quadratic Constraints

1. Factor/Style/Industry constraints

2. Tracking Error constraints. Define active holdings
Non-Convex Constraints

1. Discrete number of assets, number of stocks. Usually you don't
      need those

2. Minimum percentage idio variance. Non-pd quadratic. Don't do
      it.

                 i.e.

3. Also, maximum drawdown.
4. Usually having these constraints reflect bad

     modeling practice. Even if you can find the global
     minimum, don't
Do Constraints Improve or Worsen Performance?

  Received wisdom: yes. You're reducing the feasible region
  True only if input parameters (risk and alpha) are correct
  In practice, constraints act as regularization terms that correct

      input error
  Constraints can be priced out as penalties, and reinterpreted as

      controlling for input error, in expectation or minimax

  Read the Notes for the rigorous derivation of these
The Impact of Error on Performance

  It is an old topic

          Michaud (1989): The Markowitz Optimization Enigma: Is `Optimized' Optimal?
          Ziemba and Chopra (1992): The Effect of Errors in Means, Variances, and

               Covariances on Optimal Portfolio Choice
          Shepard (2009): Second Order Risk
          Kan and Zhou (2007): Optimal Portfolio Choice with Parameter Uncertainty
          Several papers, starting with Jagannathan and Ma (2003) interpret constraints

               as parameter regularization terms

  It is an important topic

          See the two-asset portfolio examples. These are massive reductions in
               profitability!

          The relative importance of alpha and risk is usually reported 90/10. It's based
               on no evidence whatsoever; really bad research and hot takes
Realized vs Predicted Sharpe

Realized Sharpe:

Sharpe Ratio Efficiency (SRE):

Fact: SRE < 1 and =1 iff parameters are correct
Proof: Cauchy-Schwartz
Impact of Alpha Error

Fact: If
Then

Proof: complicated but not complex. See the Appendix in the
Notes
Alpha Error: Implications

  You can estimate the angle between alphas by cross-sectional
      regression

  The result is an upper bound on SRE loss, but there is a matching
      lower bound, up to a constant! So, this is kind of tight.

  If you have an ill-conditioned (idio) true covariance matrix, the
      alpha error can be very damaging (see the 2-asset example)

  Intuition: I am wrong on a low-vol stock => I am going to be very
      very wrong in PnL
Impact of Risk Error

Fact: if

then
Risk Error: Implications

  The bound is not tight, in the sense that: a) you can be very wrong
      on the risk of a subset of your universe; b) you can alpha alpha on
      the complement set; and c) experience no loss in Sharpe

  Still: if your cov mat is off by a constant, that is ok and the
      bound gets it right

  And assume that your get the eigenportfolios right. Then there is
      a nice formula:
